---
hip: 1414
title: Introduce EVM transfer semantics to CryptoTransfer
author: Lukasz Gasior (@lukasz-hashgraph)
working-group: Lukasz Gasior (@lukasz-hashgraph), Fernando Paris (@Ferparishuertas)
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-hiero-approval: Yes
needs-hedera-review: Yes
hedera-review-date:
hedera-acceptance-decision:
status: Draft
last-call-date-time: 
discussions-to: 
created: 2026-02-17
updated: 2026-02-17
requires: 1340
---

## Abstract

Currently, when Contract Account appears as a HBAR recipient on the transfer list of a CryptoTransfer transaction it directly receives the funds, bypassing the execution of its Smart Contract logic. Similarly, code delegation of an EOA (as defined in [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340)) is not evaluated.
In this HIP we propose to change this behavior, so that the logic (EVM code) of Contract Accounts and [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340) Code Delegations are executed in the mentioned scenario.

## Motivation

The main driver for introducing this feature is having a consistent behavior across the system: HBAR transfer between two accounts should have the same effect, no matter if executed via EVM (call) or SDK (CryptoTransfer). In case of a recipient that is a Smart Contract or is using code delegation that means running the appropriate EVM code.
Additionally, this will give users more control and confidence that the system behaves as they intended. Creators of Smart Contracts and users of [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340) code delegation should be able to handle incoming HBAR transfers via their EVM code.

## Rationale

This HIP aims to satisfy the needs of users and the complement [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340) while attempting to maintain maximum backward compatibility.

There are a few ways in which HBAR might be transferred between accounts:
- an EVM transaction from account A to B
- an EVM call (inner transaction) from account A to B
- EVM selfdestruct
- CryptoDelete (related parameter: transferAccountID)
- receiving staking rewards
- CryptoTransfer
- CryptoCreate (related parameter: initialBalance)

Currently only the two EVM calls (top-level transaction and inner call) result in execution of the target/recipient EVM code.

EVM's selfdestruct operation does not constitute a call - it's a "raw" value transfer that bypasses the execution of the target EVM code. We propose to follow the same semantics in CryptoDelete. It is therefore unaffected by this HIP.

Similarly, staking rewards aren't usually considered a call in the EVM sense. This HIP does not apply to it then.

CryptoTransfer operation is the main subject of this HIP, as we indicated in the introduction.

CryptoCreate does not create contract accounts, so in principle it is unaffected by this HIP. [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340), however, introduced the possibility for users to create an account with initial code delegation configured. From one perspective this could be though of as analogous to a "contract create" operation, which would result in running the EVM code. We propose a different perspective: CryptoCreate with initial code delegation shold be thought of as a shortcut for two operations: CryptoCreate (no delegation) followed by a delegation-setting CryptoUpdate - neither of which trigger EVM code execution.

All above only applies to HBAR transfers. Token transfers (both native and EVM), following the semantics of ERC-20/ERC-721, will NOT trigger EVM calls.

## User Stories

- As a Smart Contract developer, I expect a consistent behavior from my Smart Contract whenever it receives funds from another account, no matter the route (EVM call or CryptoTransfer). I therefore expect my Smart Contract to receive a call (in the EVM sense) when it receives HBAR via CryptoTransfer.
- As a network user, I expect a consistent behavior from my account using [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340) code delegation whenever it receives funds from another account, no matter the route (EVM call or CryptoTransfer). I therefore expect my EOA to receive a call (in the EVM sense) when it receives HBAR via CryptoTransfer and execute the corresponding Smart Contract code (delegation target).
- As a network user, I expect that transferring HBAR using CryptoTransfer to a Contract Account results in execution of that Smart Contract's EVM code.
- As a network user, I expect that transferring HBAR using CryptoTransfer to an Account which is using code delegation results in execution of the corresponding target Contract's EVM code.

## Specification

Since `CryptoTransfer`'s `TransferList` is just a list of accounts and their respective balance changes (which all must sum up to 0), we shall start by introducing a notion of a transfer between two accounts and a canonical algorithm for extracting those transfers from the `TransferList`. For the sake of the algorithm we'll call this ephemeral record a `BilateralTransfer`.
`BilateralTransfer` in its base form consists of three fields: `sender`, `receiver` and `amount`.

To collect `BilateralTransfer`s from the `TransferList` we propose to adopt the following algorithm, which is currently used for generating synthetic EVM `Transfer(...)` events:

1. Separate out all senders (negative AccountAmount) and receivers (positive AccountAmount) into two lists. Use `abs(amount)` for senders.
2. Sort both lists comparing `amount DESC` then comparing `account shard ASC` then comparing `account realm ASC` then comparing `account number ASC` (if present) then comparing `account alias ASC` (if present).
3. Iterate both lists following these steps:
```
  int senderIdx = 0;
  int receiverIdx = 0;
  while (senderIdx < senders.size() && receiverIdx < receivers.size()) {
      final var senderEntry = senders.get(senderIdx);
      final var receiverEntry = receivers.get(receiverIdx);
      final var amount = Math.min(senderEntry.amount, receiverEntry.amount);
      bilateralTransfer.add(new BilateralTransfer(senderEntry.accountId, receiverEntry.accountId, amount));
      senderEntry.amount -= amount;
      receiverEntry.amount -= amount;
      if (senderEntry.amount == 0) senderIdx++;
      if (receiverEntry.amount == 0) receiverIdx++;
  }
```

Note that even though an account may only appear as a sender/recipient once, it might be involved in multiple `BilateralTransfer`s (e.g. consider a transfer of 10 units to account A from accounts B and C, 5 units withdrawn from each).

The same notion of `BilateralTransfer` and the same algorithm should be used across the system whenever this concept is needed (e.g. when generating synthetic EVM events for native transfers, where it's already used). The (pseudo)code above only serves as an example, implementators are free to adjust it (e.g. use different primitives or exact collection types) as long as it produces the same resulant entries in the exact same order (which might require extra care e.g. if the transfer list comes partially pre-sorted).

We will now extend this base algorithm to support the primary goal of this HIP: adding EVM calls.

We propose to extend `CryptoTransferTransactionBody` with an additional optional field:

```
/**
 * Specifies details of EVM contract calls executed within this transfer.
 */
message EvmContractCalls {
    /**
     * Call data to pass to each call.
     */
    bytes call_data = 1;

    /**
     * Total gas limit to use for all calls.
     */
    uint64 cumulative_gas_limit = 2;
}

message CryptoTransferTransactionBody {
    ...

     /**
     * Configuration of EVM contract calls executed within this transfer.
     */
    EvmContractCalls contract_calls = 3;
}
```

Handling logic of CryptoTransfer transaction will then be updated to execute HBAR transfers one by one, following the order of the `BilateralTransfer`s list.

We say that an account is _callable_ when:
- it is either a Contract Account or an EOA using [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340) code delegation
- AND it is eligible to receive a call following the rules defined in the "Backward compatibility" section.

As a first step assign `remaining_gas := cumulative_gas_limit`. If `EvmContractCalls` information was not provided use a default of `remaining_gas := 3300` (further explained in the section below dedicated to gas charging).
User is allowed to set `cumulative_gas_limit := 0`, in which case no EVM calls should succeed. Do not use a default of `3300` if `cumulative_gas_limit` is set to 0.

Then, for each item on the list:

1. (All transfers) Update the HBAR balances and allowance (if allowance is used) of sender and receiver accounts.
2. (Only if receiver is a _callable_ account) Using `remaining_gas` and call data from `EvmContractCalls` dispatch a child `ContractCall` originating from the sender account and targeting the receiving account. Use `0x` (empty) for call data if `EvmContractCalls` was not provided. If the result of the call is an error (e.g. EVM revert), fail the `CryptoTransfer` - revert all other transfers and the effects of EVM calls made so far, including hook EVM calls. Fee charges for any execution made so far should be kept.
3. (Only if receiver is a _callable_ account) If `EvmContractCalls` was provided: set `remaining_gas -= gas_consumed_in_step_2`, else reset `remaining_gas := 3300`.

Finally, once all HBAR transfers are processed, finalize the transfer by processing non-HBAR token transfers and associations.

---

Gas limit provided in `EvmContractCalls` is a total amount available for all calls. Gas limit provided to each subsequent call should be reduced by the amount consumed so far by any previous calls (the first call gets the full `cumulative_gas_limit` amount).

Call data is the same for all calls.

Setting `EvmContractCalls` is allowed even if no contract calls are executed. In this case it will not be used.

The verification of `receiverSigRequired` flag for all recipient accounts should be done before any child calls are dispatched.

### Child ContractCall details

The sender of the call (accessible via the ORIGIN op code) should be the sender account of the corresponding `BilateralTransfer`. It should be the account from which funds are withdrawn, including when allowance is used.

The value (accessible via the CALLVALUE op code) should be the amount of the corresponding `BilateralTransfer`.

The nonce of the sender account should NOT be incremented.

The effects (state changes) of all previous transfers (regardless of whether they trigger a call or not) and hook calls should be visible in subsequent calls (e.g. when querying for the HBAR balance of an account processed earlier).

### Gas cost

The payer of the original CryptoTransfer transaction pays for all gas charges incurred when executing the contract calls up to the specified `cumulative_gas_limit` value.

Similarly to hooks (see [HIP-1195#Gas charging](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1195#gas-charging)) we propose a reduced intrinsic gas rate for contract calls. We propose adding another network property to give this effect while keeping it customizable for Hiero network operators.

```
cryptotransfer.evm.intrinsicGasCost=1000
```

If `EvmContractCalls` is not provided we propose to use a default of `3300` gas units available individually for each call. This value is a sum of the standard gas stipend of 2300 available for `transfer()` calls in Solidity and the 1000 of intrinsic gas mentioned above.

The transfer list is, by default, limited to 10 items. That gives a maximum of 9 `BilateralTransfer`s per transaction.
The maximum gas charge for users not providing custom `EvmContractCalls` details will therefore be: `3300 * 9 = 29700` gas units.

This default amount seems to be a reasonable balance between the two aspects of maintaining backward compatibility:
- supporting existing applications with minimal disruption
- protecting from unintentional high charges

### Impact on HTS System Contract

HTS System Contract will be extended with a new variant (V3) of the `cryptoTransfer(...)` method with the following signature:

`cryptoTransfer(((address,int64,bool)[]),(address,(address,int64,bool)[],(address,address,int64,bool)[])[],(bytes,uint64))`

where the last tuple on the argument list (`(bytes,uint64)`) corresponds to the fields of `EvmContractCalls`, that is: `call_data` and `cumulative_gas_limit`.

The implementation of the new system contract method should set those fields on the corresponding child CryptoTransfer transaction.

The V1 version of `cryptoTransfer(...)` only works for tokens, so it is unaffected by this HIP.

V2, which also works for HBAR, is impacted. A default value of `3300` gas units per transfer will be additionally charged.

Note that this HIP introduces a re-entrancy possibility when using the `cryptoTransfer(...)` System Contract method.

### Hooks interoperability

All child EVM calls should be executed in the following order:

1. Execute all `allow` hooks (no change)
2. Execute all `allowPre` hooks (no change)
3. Execute transfers and contract calls as described in this HIP (new calls)
4. Execute all `allowPost` hooks (no change)

Note that this HIP also introduces a nested re-entrancy possibility for hooks (mixed EVM call types), e.g.:

```
CryptoTransfer -> Hook EVM call -> cryptoTransfer(...) System Contract call -> Contract call when handling the child CryptoTransfer
```

HTS System Contract does not currently support hooks, so nested hook invocations (like `Hook call -> ... -> Hook call`) are not possible.

### Throttle limits

All calls made within the transfer are subject to the same throttle limits as any other top-level Smart Contract transaction (see [HIP-1249](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1249)).
As a result, the transfer might fail with a `CONSENSUS_GAS_EXHAUSTED` error.

### Impact on Mirror Node

Mirror Node will need to handle the updated format of `CryptoTransferTransactionBody` and store the corresponding `EvmContractCalls` information.

Mirror Node will need to process the child EVM calls and store the resultant contract call results (similarly to hook EVM calls).

Mirror Node will need to ensure that the gas estimations returned by the API include the extra charges for EVM calls.

### Impact on RPC Relay

RPC Relay should ensure that `eth_estimateGas` returns accurate estimations for transactions that include child CryptoTransfers that result in subsequent EVM calls.

RPC Relay should ensure that `eth_call` is correctly simulated for transactions that include child CryptoTransfers that result in subsequent EVM calls.

RPC Relay should ensure that any combination of child/parent relationship between CryptoTransfer and EthereumTransactino/ContractCall is propely represented.
This includes ensuring code delegation (EOA) compatibility.

### Impact on SDK

SDKs will need to add support for setting the `EvmContractCalls` field.

### Impact on Hashscan

Hashscan should ensure that any child Contract Calls will correctly show up on the list (likely already covered by existing mechanisms).
It should also display the `EvmContractCalls` information associated with any parent or child CryptoUpdate transaction.

## Backward compatibility

There may be existing Smart Contracts which revert when they receive an EVM call (e.g. if they don't implement a payable `receive` or `fallback` function), that can currently receive HBAR via CryptoTransfer without any issues.
We propose to introduce a backward compatibility mechanism, so that any preexisting Smart Contracts can continue to receive HBAR via CryptoTransfer, even if their EVM call execution would fail.
Contract Calls should only be dispatched for Contract Accounts created on or after a specified fixed timestamp (exact value TBD).
Any Smart Contract Accounts created before that should not trigger a contract call nor charge any additional gas (skip those steps). Otherwise they're processed normally.
Since [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340) code delegation haven't yet been enabled, there's no need for a backwards compatibility mechanism for EOAs. [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340) wll be enabled for end users at the same time as the changes proposed in this HIP.

There may also be existing applications that use CryptoTransfer, which currently work without providing `EvmContractCalls` details - they will continue to function for arbitrary Smart Contract Accounts created before the fixed timestamp, but they may need to be adjusted if they wish to support newer Smart Contract Accounts that require more than `2300` (default) gas for execution.

## Security Implications

Child contract calls should only see the call "signed" by the sender of each individual call.
Even if the original CryptoTransfer transaction was signed by multiple accounts.

Users must be aware that:
- sending a CryptoTransfer transaction might trigger zero or more EVM contract calls
- re-entrancy is possible (the EVM call itself might dispatch a child CryptoTransfer via a System Contract)

## How to Teach This

Sending a CryptoTransfer transaction may result in zero or more Smart Contract calls.
Call details should be explicitly provided in the `EvmContractCalls` field, otherwise a default value will be used.

## Reference Implementation

The reference implementation must be complete before any HIP is given the status
of “Final.” The final implementation must include test code and documentation.

## Rejected Ideas

None at this time.

## Open Issues

- TODO: we need more details on Mirror Node impact

## References

- [HIP-1195](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1195)
- [HIP-1249](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1249)
- [HIP-1340](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1340)

## Copyright/license
This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 —
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or <https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>.
