---
hip: 0000
title: CryptoTransfer Contract Calls
author: Lukasz Gasior (@lukasz.gasior)
working-group: Lukasz Gasior (@lukasz.gasior), Fernando Paris (@Ferparishuertas)
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-hiero-approval: Yes
needs-hedera-review: Yes
hedera-review-date:
hedera-acceptance-decision:
status: Draft
last-call-date-time: 
discussions-to: 
created: 2026-02-17
updated: 2026-02-17
---

## Abstract

Currently, when Contract Account appears as a HBAR recipient on the transfer list of a CryptoTransfer transaction it directly receives the funds, bypassing the execution of its Smart Contract logic.
In this HIP we propose to change this behavior, so that the logic (EVM code) of the Contract Account is executed in the mentioned scenario.

## Motivation

There are three main drivers for introducing this feature:
- Having a consistent behavior across the system: HBAR transfer between two accounts should have the same effect, no matter if executed via EVM (call) or SDK (CryptoTransfer). In case of a Smart Contract recipient that means running their code.
- Give user more control and reliability: owners of Smart Contracts should be able to handle incoming HBAR transfers via their EVM code.
- Compatibility with the upcoming HIP-1340 update: HIP-1340 introduces "Smart Accounts" via Code Delegation. As a prerequisite to completing HIP-1340 we need to define the CryptoTransfer behavior for regular Smart Contract calls.

## User Stories

- As a Smart Contract developer, I expect a consistent behavior from my Smart Contract whenever it receives funds from another account, no matter the route (EVM call or CryptoTransfer). I therefore expect my Smart Contract to receive a call (in the EVM sense) when it receives HBAR via CryptoTransfer.
- As a network user, I expect that transferring HBAR to a Contract Account using CryptoTransfer results in execution of that Smart Contract's EVM code

## Specification

Since `CryptoTransfer`'s `TransferList` is just a list of accounts and their respective balance changes (which all need to sum up to 0), we shall start by introducing a notion of a transfer between two accounts and a canonical algorithm for extracting those transfers from the `TransferList`. For the sake of the algorithm we'll call this ephemeral record a `BilateralTransfer`.
`BilateralTransfer` in its base form consists of three fields: `sender`, `receiver` and `amount`. To collect `BilateralTransfer`s from the `TransferList` use the following algorithm:

```
1. Separate out all senders (negative AccountAmount) and receivers (positive AccountAmount) into two lists.
2. Sort both lists comparing `abs(amount) DESC` then comparing `account shard ASC` then comparing `account realm ASC` then comparing `account number ASC` then comparing `account alias ASC`.
3. Iterate both lists like so:
  int senderIdx = 0;
  int receiverIdx = 0;
  while (senderIdx < senders.size() && receiverIdx < receivers.size()) {
      final var senderEntry = senders.get(senderIdx);
      final var receiverEntry = receivers.get(receiverIdx);
      final var amount = Math.min(senderEntry.amount, receiverEntry.amount);
      bilateralTransfer.add(new BilateralTransfer(sender, receiver, amount));
      sender.amount -= amount;
      receiver.amount -= amount;
      if (sender.amount == 0) senderIdx++;
      if (receiver.amount == 0) receiverIdx++;
  }
```

Note that even though an account may only appear as a sender/recipient once, it might be involved in multiple `BilateralTransfer`s (e.g. consider a transfer of 10 units to account A from accounts B and C, 5 units withdrawn from each).

The same notion of `BilateralTransfer` and the same algorithm should be used across the system whenever this concept is needed (e.g. when generating synthetic EVM events for native transfers).

We will now extend this base algorithm to support the primary goal of this HIP: Contract Calls.

We propose to extend CryptoTransfer's AccountAmount with an additional optional field:

```
/**
 * Specifies details of a call to a contract.
 */
message EvmContractCall {
    /**
     * Call data to pass to the call.
     */
    bytes call_data = 1;

    /**
     * The gas limit to use.
     */
    uint64 gas_limit = 2;
}

message AccountAmount {
    ...

    EvmContractCall contract_call = 6;
}
```

Receiver's `EvmContractCall` information should be collected when preparing `BilateralTransfer`s.

Handling logic of CryptoTransfer transaction should then be updated to execute the transfers one by one, following the order of the `BilateralTransfer`s list.

Specifically, for each item on the list:

1. Update the balances of sender and receiver accounts

And then, if the receiver is a Smart Contract Account:

2. Verify that `EvmContractCall` was provided on the corresponding receiving `AccountAmount` entry, fail if it's missing
3. Using the gas limit and call data provided in `EvmContractCall` dispatch a child `ContractCall` originating from the sender account
and targetting the receiving Smart Contract Account. If the result of the call is an error (e.g. EVM revert), fail the `CryptoTransfer` - revert all other transfers and the effects of EVM calls made so far, including hook EVM calls. Fee charges for any execution made so far should be kept.

Note that a single `EvmContractCall` entry on the receiving account may be used in more than one child call execution - in this case the same gas limit and call data values should be used for each execution independently.

Setting `EvmContractCall` on a sender account or on a receiving account that is not a Smart Contract is allowed, but the value will not be used.

The verification of `receiverSigRequired` flag for all recipient accounts should be done before any child calls are dispatched.

### Child ContractCall details

The sender of the call (accessible via the ORIGIN op code) should be the sender account of the corresponding `BilateralTransfer`. It should be the account from which funds are withdrawn, including when allowance is used.

The value (accessible via the CALLVALUE op code) should be the amount of the corresponding `BilateralTransfer`.

The nonce of the sender account should NOT be incremented.

The effects (state changes) of all previous transfers (regardless of whether they trigger a call or not) and hook calls should be visible in subsequent calls (e.g. when querying for the HBAR balance of an account processed earlier).

### Impact on hooks

All child EVM calls should be executed in the following order:

1. Execute all `allow` hooks (order unchanged)
2. Execute all `allowPre` hooks (order unchanged)
3. Execute transfers and contract calls as described in this HIP
4. Execute all `allowPost` hooks (order unchanged)

## Backward compatibility

There may be existing Smart Contracts which revert when they receive an EVM call (e.g. if they don't implement a payable `receive` function), that can still receive HBAR via CryptoTransfer without any issues.
We propose to introduce a backward compatibility mechanism to support this use case.
Contract Calls should only be dispatched for Contract Accounts created on or after a fixed timestamp (exact value TBD).
Any Smart Contract Accounts created before that should be treated the same way as non-contract accounts. Specifically:
- do not dispatch child contract calls
- if they're the recipient and `EvmContractCall` is set, then the value is ignored

There may also be existing applications that use CryptoTransfer, which currently work without providing `EvmContractCall` details - they will continue to function for Smart Contract Accounts created before the fixed timestamp, but they will need to be adjusted if they wish to support Smart Contract Accounts created on or after that timestamp.

## Impact on Mirror Node

Mirror Node will need to handle the updated format of `CryptoTransfer` and store the corresponding `EvmContractCall` information.

### Impact on RPC Relay

No impact on RPC Relay is expected.

### Impact on SDK

SDKs will need to add support for setting `EvmContractCall` details.

### Impact on Hashscan

Hashscan should ensure that any child Contract Calls will correctly show up on the list (likely already covered by existing mechanisms).

## Security Implications

Child contract calls should only see the call "signed" by the sender of each individual call.
Even if the original CryptoTransfer transaction was signed by multiple accounts.

TODO: or maybe not?

Users must be aware that sending CryptoTransfer might trigger a contract call.
This is ensured by the fact that they must explicitly provide `EvmContractCall` details for each such call.

## How to Teach This

Sending a CryptoTransfer transaction may result in one or more Smart Contract calls.
All calls must be explicitly provided with `EvmContractCall` details, otherwise CryptoTransfer will fail.

## Reference Implementation

The reference implementation must be complete before any HIP is given the status
of “Final.” The final implementation must include test code and documentation.

## Rejected Ideas

None at this time.

## Open Issues

## References

https://docs.hedera.com/hedera/core-concepts/smart-contracts/security

## Copyright/license
This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 —
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or <https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>.
