---
hip: 1179
title: Generalized Schedule Contract Call
author: Matthew DeLorenzo (@littletarzan), Michael Tinker (@tinker-michaelj)
working-group:
requested-by: Hashgraph
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-hedera-review: Yes
hedera-review-date:
hedera-approval-status:
needs-hiero-approval: Yes
status: Review 
created: 2025-04-09
discussions-to: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals/discussions/1096
updated: 2025-06-10
requires: 756
replaces: 
superseded-by: 
---

## Abstract
We generalize HIP-756 ("Contract Scheduled Token Create") by allowing smart contracts to
utilize the Hedera Schedule Service (HSS) for any possible smart contract call; and by also
giving these these scheduled calls the option to wait for expiry, instead of executing as
soon as they have the required sender signature.

The main design concern is throttling; that is, what happens when a contract call is 
scheduled at a time `T` that is already full of scheduled work. Retry logic would be
hard to implement reliably in the EVM given the constraints of gas limits. So we propose
to extend the curent HSS semantics of, "Schedule to execute _exactly at_ `T`" with another
option: "Schedule to execute _not before_ `T`". This will let a user, even when scheduling
through the Hiero API (HAPI), schedule execution not before some time `T` and be certain
that scheduling will succeed. 

The generalized HSS system contract will always schedule calls with "not before" semantics.

## Motivation
HIP-755 ("Schedule Service System Contract") extended the ability to schedule transactions
to the Hedera Smart Contract Service. While this is very useful for smart contract calls by
externally owned accounts (EOAs), it requires off-chain coordination and it does not extend
to smart contracts calling other smart contracts as the origin of the transaction. 
Furthermore, HIP-755 does not fully support regularly scheduled transactions, as the 
off-chain signatures and message submission must be repeated for each transaction.

Extending HIP-756 to call contracts in the future would enable recursive execution and
rescheduling of contract calls, resulting in a "set it and forget it" system by which
contract calls can be made at regularly scheduled intervals as long as the transaction
payer has enough HBAR to cover the scheduling and gas and fees.

## Rationale
This HIP provides the possiblility to have fully on-chain "cron jobs" that regularly
call smart contracts, replacing various off-chain mechanisms users have relied on til now.

## User stories
1. As a smart contract developer, I want to reduce my technical overhead through
having a contract call itself or other contracts.

Useful examples for this upgrade could include:
 - Rebalancing DeFi positions; or,
 - Claiming tokens from vesting contracts at regular intervals; or, 
 - Changing token statuses at a predetermined epoch time in the future.

## Specification

### HAPI "not before" scheduling semantics

We propose to add to the `ScheduleCreateTransactionBody`,

```protobuf
message ScheduleCreateTransactionBody {
    // ...

    /**
      * The scheduling guarantee the user wants for the scheduled transaction.
      * <p>
      * If not set, the default is `ONLY_AT_EXPIRY_SECOND`.
     */
    SchedulingGuarantee scheduling_guarantee = 14;
}

/**
 * What scheduling guarantee the user wants for the scheduled transaction.
 */
enum SchedulingGuarantee {
    /**
     * If the transaction cannot be scheduled at the exact requested second,
     * either the submitting node will reject it at ingest with BUSY; or the 
     * transaction will fail with SCHEDULE_EXPIRY_IS_BUSY at consensus.
     */
    ONLY_AT_EXPIRY_SECOND = 0;
    /**
     * The transaction will only receive BUSY at ingest if the network as a 
     * whole is too busy with all forms of transactions. Scheduling will never
     * fail for a lack of resources at the requested second, because if that
     * second is full, the transaction will simply be scheduled at a later
     * second.
     * <p>
     * <b>IMPORTANT:</b> There is no way to predict exactly what second the
     * transaction will be scheduled at; honest nodes will assign it using a
     * deterministic but pseudorandom policy.
     */
    NOT_BEFORE_EXPIRY_SECOND = 1;
}
```

When handling a `ScheduleCreateTransactionBody` with requested guarantee
`NOT_BEFORE_EXPIRY_SECOND`, in the rare case that the requested second has all 
possible work scheduled, honest nodes will use the same pseudorandom seed from
HIP-351 ("Add UtilPrngTransaction") to consider an increasingly distant series of
later seconds for available capacity.

To compensate the network for this possible additional work, we suggest the
fee for "not before" semantics be slightly higher than the normal `ScheduleCreate`
fee.

### HSS System Contract
The `IHederaScheduleService.sol` interface must be updated to support everything
needed to schedule an arbtirary call from within the EVM, including the `to` address,
the call data to use, the gas limit for the future call, and the value to send with
that call.

An important option is to let the scheduling contract specify a sender address that
may be different from its own. In this case the scheduled call can only execute 
after receiving enough valid signatures to activate the sender's key. The difference
between `scheduleCallWithPayer()` and `executeCallOnPayerSignature()` is that the
former still waits until the consensus second is not before `nbf` to execute, while
the latter executes as soon as the payer signs (unless consensus time is already 
past the `expiry`, of course).

```
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
| Hash        | Function signature                                                                                                                                                   |
|-------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 0x6f5bfde8  | scheduleCall(address to, uint256 nbf, uint256 gasLimit, uint64 value, bytes memory callData) returns (int64 responseCode)                                            |
| 0xeb459436  | scheduleCallWithSender(address to, address sender, uint256 nbf, uint256 gasLimit, uint64 value, bytes memory callData) returns (int64 responseCode)                  |
| 0x2c300715  | executeCallOnSenderSignature(address to, address sender, uint256 expiry, uint256 gasLimit, uint64 value, bytes memory callData) returns (int64 responseCode)         |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

## Backwards Compatibility
No existing features are modified as this only exposes HAPI functionality to smart
contracts.

## Security Implications

On the surface, one might worry this proposal would let a contract create an infinite
loop by scheduling a call to itself at the same second it is currently executing. However,
HSS requires the scheduled second to be strictly later than the current consensus second.
So it would be strictly more expensive to saturate a Hiero network's gas throttle by
scheduling contract calls than it would be to simply submit those calls through HAPI.

## How to Teach This

Smart contracts can now schedule calls to other contracts (or themselves!) from inside the EVM.

## Reference Implementation

In progress, see an initial hackathon implementation [here](https://github.com/tinker-michaelj/hedera-services/tree/autumn).

## Rejected Ideas

We considered a proposal restricted to just the current HSS "schedule exactly at" semantics;
but the burden placed on smart contract authors seemed prohibitive.

## Open Issues

There are no known open issues.

## References
1. [HIP-755](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-755)
2. [HIP-756](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-756)
2. [HIP-351](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-351)

## Copyright/license
This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 —
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or <https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>.
