---
hip: 1357
title: Tier 1 Block Node Operation Rewards
author: Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>
working-group: Nana Essilfie-Conduah <@Nana-EC>, Richard Bair <@rbair23>, Neeharika Sompalli <@Neeharika-Sompalli>
requested-by: Tier 1 Block Node Operators
discussions-to: 
type: Standards Track
category: Service
needs-hiero-approval: Yes 
needs-hedera-review: Yes
status: Draft
created: 2025-12-02
updated: 2025-12-02
requires: 1056, 1086
replaces:
superseded-by:
release:
---

## Abstract
This proposal introduces a new flag in a consensus node's address book entry to indicate whether the associated
AccountId should receive block node rewards for operating a Tier 1 block node.

## Motivation
Block nodes provide a community service by decentralizing network data storage and ensuring blocks are distributed
with diverse ownership. Operating these nodes requires acquiring and maintaining hosting servers, along with ongoing
upgrades and maintenance. Tier 1 block node operators should be rewarded for providing these fundamental services and
ensuring consensus nodes have a reliable location to push blocks.

Additionally, Tier 1 block operators are also council consensus node operators. Having all their node operation
rewards designated in one place and distributed to the same AccountId is valuable.

## Rationale
Each node entry in the address book will have a new `block_node_reward_eligible` flag. This flag indicates whether the
AccountId owner is eligible to receive daily rewards for operating a Tier 1 block node.

An additional configuration, `targetYearlyBlockNodeRewardsUsd`, will be added to capture the estimated dollar cost of
operating a Tier 1 block node on cloud services. This amount will be divided by 365 days and converted to the native
cryptocurrency to determine the daily reward issued to each block node operator.

## User stories
1. **As a Tier 1 block node operator**, I want to be rewarded for my services in full time operation of a block node.
2. **As a Hiero network governing authority** (e.g., Hedera Council), I want to be able to designate that a network
    node operator Id is eligible for block node rewards fees
3. **As a Hiero network governing authority** (e.g., Hedera Council), I want to be able to designate the total yearly
    cost the network is willing to pay a block node operator in a year for their services.

## Specification
During nightly reward fee calculations, a consensus node iterates over all node objects in the address book and checks
if their `block_node_reward_eligible` flag is set to `true`. If the flag is true and the accountId is also eligible for
consensus node rewards (based on participation in enough consensus rounds), the network issues a `CryptoTransfer` of
`(targetYearlyBlockNodeRewardsUsd ($) / # of staking periods per year) * exchangeRate (h/$)`.

This ensures that governing authority members only receive block node rewards if they satisfy both consensus and block
node operation obligations.

When setting or changing `block_node_reward_eligible`, the transaction must be signed by the network admin key.

### Consensus Node Specification

Add a `block_node_reward_eligible` to `node.proto` message in the addressbook

```protobuf
message Node {
  ...
  
  /**
    * A flag indicating is this nodes AccoutnId is eligible for block node rewards
    * <p>
    * If this field is set, then this nodes AccountId SHALL receive any block node rewards
    * distributed at the end of the staking period.
    */
  bool block_node_reward_eligible = 13;
}
```

Add a `block_node_reward_eligible` field to `NodeCreateTransactionBody` and `NodeUpdateTransactionBody` to allow the
council to specify if a nodes AccountId should receive Tier 1 block node operation rewards.

```protobuf
message NodeCreateTransactionBody {
  ...

  /**
    * A boolean indicating whether this node AccountId is eligible for block
    * node rewards
    * <p>
    * This node AccountId SHALL receive rewards if this value is set, and `true`.
    */
  bool block_node_reward_eligible = 10;
}
```

```protobuf
message NodeUpdateTransactionBody {
  ...

  /**
    * A boolean indicating whether this node AccountId is eligible for block
    * node rewards
    * <p>
    * This node AccountId SHALL receive rewards if this value is set, and `true`.
    */
  google.protobuf.BoolValue block_node_reward_eligible = 11;
}
```

Add a `targetYearlyBlockNodeRewardsUsd` config property to the NodesConfig.

### Impact on Mirror Node
Mirror nodes will need to update their `api/v1/network/nodes` API with a new `block_node_reward_eligible` field

```json
{
  "nodes": [
    {
	    ...
	    "block_node_reward_eligible": true,
	    ...
    }
  ]
}
```

### Impact on SDK
SDKs will need to be update to set `block_node_reward_eligible` fields in the NodeCreate and NodeUpdate transactions

## Backwards Compatibility
This HIP introduces additional fields within the existing node address book framework and maintains backwards
compatibility.

## Security Implications
No changes to security rules are made, as all `NodeCreateTransaction` and `NodeCreateTransaction` transactions require signing and the network
requires configuration and consensus on new values. No new entry or exit pathways are added.

## How to Teach This


## Reference Implementation


## Rejected Ideas


## Open Issues
- [ ] Confirm no additional efforts are needed for transaction costs or distribution account

## References
A collection of URLs used as references throughout the HIP.

## Copyright/license
This document is licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 —
see [LICENSE](../LICENSE) or <https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0>.
